Overview
--------
This dataset contains ECoG as well as fMRI recordings from a single patient obtained 
while the patient performed three different visual tasks (spatialobject, spatialpattern, 
and temporalpattern). The ECoG data was recorded at NYU School of Medicine (SOM). 
The fMRI data was recorded post-operatively at NYU Department of Psychology (NYU). 
A separate pre-operative T1weighted MRI scan was collected at SOM.  

These data were collected as part of an NIH Brain Initiative supported project. The 
overarching goal of this project is to build empirically supported models of visual 
and somatosensory population responses by linking together neural signals (measured 
with ECoG) and BOLD responses (measured with fMRI). This is a visual experimental 
dataset; the same tasks were run in both modalities to allow for comparison of the 
ECoG and BOLD responses. For details about the tasks and the collected data, see 
the `Details about the visual tasks` section. 


Citing this dataset
-------------------
The dataset is as of yet (02-26-2019) unpublished. The data was collected by 
Jonathan Winawer (NYU) and Stephanie Montenegro (NYU). The BIDS formatting 
was performed by Iris Groen (NYU) with help from Giovanni Piantoni (UMC Utrecht) 
and Dora Hermes (UMC Utrecht). The project is funded by the National Institute Of 
Mental Health of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number R01MH111417 
to Natalia Petridou (UMC Utrecht) and Jonathan Winawer. The ECoG data collection 
was facilitated by Orrin Devinsky (NYU SOM) and Adeen Flinker (NYU SOM). 

Please see http://umcu-nyu-brain.wikidot.com for further information.


License
-------
This dataset is made available under the Public Domain Dedication and License \\nv1.0, 
whose full text can be found at \\nhttp://www.opendatacommons.org/licenses/pddl/1.0/.


Format
------
It is formatted according to BIDS version 1.1.5 and the BIDS standard extension
for iEEG (BEP010), which can be found here:

https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/latest/04-modality-specific-files/04-intracranial-electroencephalography.html

Note that BEP010 was not yet integrated in the main BIDS-spec by 02-26-2019.


Details about the visual tasks
----------------------------
All tasks involved brief presentations of a single visual stimulus presented at 8 
degrees of visual angle. The stimuli were regenerated after this publication:

Kay KN, Winawer J, Rokem A, Mezer A, Wandell BA (2013) A Two-Stage Cascade Model 
of BOLD Responses in Human Visual Cortex. PLoS Comput Biol 9(5): e1003079. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003079

All stimuli were band-pass filtered to contain a peak spatial frequency of 3 
cycles per degree. In the 'spatialobject' task, images of houses, faces and 
letters were shown. In the 'spatial pattern' task, images of randomly generated 
curved line segments were shown that were systematically varied in the level of 
contrast and density, as well as three types of gratings. In the 'temporal pattern' 
task, the same pattern stimuli were shown at fixed (high) contrast, either for 
one presentation per trial (one-pulse) or two presentations (two-pulse). For the 
one-pulse stimuli, stimulus duration was varied; for the two-pulse stimuli, inter-
stimulus-interval (ISI) was varied. The exact same stimuli were shown in both fMRI 
and ECoG. For fMRI, the inter-trial-intervals were longer than for ECoG (fMRI: 
jittered ITI between 3 and 6 seconds; EcoG, jittered ITI between 1.25 and 1.75 
seconds), as well as the pre- and post-baseline periods (fMRI: 11.9 seconds; 
ECoG: 3 seconds). Trial-unique stimuli were shown in runs 1 and 2 of each task. 
Runs 3 and 4 are exact repeats of run 1 and 2, respectively. Please refer to the 
events.json and events.tsv files for details.


Contact
----------------------------
Please contact Iris Groen (iris.groen@nyu.edu) for questions. 
