Description of the study adapted from Brandmeyer and Delorme (2016) Reduced mind wandering in experienced meditators and associated EEG correlates, Exp Brain Res, DOI 10.1007/s00221-016-4811-5

The study was conducted at the Meditation Research Institute (MRI) in Rishikesh, India. Twenty-five meditators from the Himalayan Yoga tradition participated in this study. After data collection, one participant reported that they did not fully understand the task instructions and was excluded from the analyses. Thus, 24 participants were assigned to one of two groups based on experience and hours of daily practice. Individuals who had engaged in a daily meditation practice for a minimum of 2 hours daily, for 1 year or longer were considered expert practitioners (3 females; 14.8 weekly hours with SD of 1.6 hours; mean age of 39.3 with SD of 12.0). Participants who were trained and familiar with the techniques, but who reported irregular practice (10 females; 3.2 mean weekly hours with SD of 3.1 hours; mean age of 45.0 with SD of 14.8) were considered non-expert practitioners. All participants provided written consent to participate in the study and completed an extensive list of questions regarding their meditation background. Participants stated that they were not taking any medications that could potentially affect their concentration. The study received ethical approval from both the ethics committee of the Meditation Research Institute in India, and from the Comite de Protection des Personnes in France. Participants were all volunteers and were not compensated.

Experimental paradigm and Procedure

All participants were asked to meditate continuously throughout the experiment in their usual seated meditation position (either seated on the floor, or in a chair). Meditators were all practitioners of the Himalayan Yoga tradition. Once subjects were comfortably seated in their meditative posture, they were instructed to begin their meditation. They all began with an initial body scan as they relaxed into their seated posture, and then started to mentally recite their mantra, which is a word or sentence assigned to them by their meditation teacher - if deeper levels of meditation or stillness are obtained, mantra repetitions are often ceased. Mantras are derived from Sanskrit root words and syllables, whose resonance is thought to induce stability of the mind without the need for an overly intense focus. 
Experience sampling probes were presented at random intervals ranging from 30 seconds to 90 seconds throughout the duration of the experiment. Probes, in the form of pre-recorded vocalized questions, were presented on two freestanding speakers, and were reported as clearly audible by all subjects. Each experience sampling probe series consisted of three questions, which were presented in the same order throughout the experiment and are described in detail below. Subjects responded on a small customized numeric USB keypad resting on their right thigh, to enable their right hand to comfortably rest without having to move or open their eyes. The time range of the experiment lasted from 45 minutes to 1 hour 30 minutes, as some subjects were willing and able to sit comfortably for longer periods of time. The minimum number of probes that participants received was 30. The entire experiment was programed and automated using the Matlab psychophysics toolbox. All participants completed a 5 minute training block prior to performing the experiment.
Experience sampling probes consisted of three questions that followed sequentially; the first question was Q1: “Please rate the depth of your meditation”, for which participants evaluated the subjective depth of their ‘meditative state’ for the moments immediately preceding the first probe, on a scale from 0 (not meditating at all) to 3 (deep meditative state) by pressing the corresponding key on the keypad. After their response was registered, the second question Q2: “Please rate the depth of your mind wandering” automatically followed. Participants evaluated the subjective depth of their ‘mind wandering’ for the period of time which immediately preceded the first probe, on a scale from 0 (not mind wandering at all) to 3 (immersed in their thoughts). The last question was Q3:  “Please rate how tired you are”, where participants were asked to rate the subjective depth of their drowsiness at the time of the first question, from 0 (not drowsy at all) to 3 (very drowsy). All responses pertained to the evaluations of the same time period immediately preceding the first probe. Participants were then instructed to resume their meditation with the prompt: “You may now resume your meditation”. 
 
Data acquisition

We collected data using a 64 channels Biosemi system and a Biosemi 10-20 head cap montage at 2048 Hz sampling rate. All electrodes were kept within an offset of 15 using the Biosemi ActiView data acquisition system for measuring impedance. Respiration, heart rate (ECG/HRV) and galvanic skin response (GSR) were also recorded, but results from this data will not be reported here. 

